foreign
[Music]
accomplishment where we explore how
deepening connection with ourselves and
others leads to creating the life we
want with enjoyment and ease I'm Brett
Kistler here today with my co-host Joe
Hudson
[Music]
huh boy how are you today
oh it's been a lot man it's been good
it's been good I am I'm in Denver
Colorado and uh just
did a session with like 350 people at
this company it was really fun
ah very cool and you can see the hotel
room I mean everybody listening to the
podcast the podcast
look at this thing I mean it's like sumo
wrestler with bunny ears on is the art
in the walls of this hotel room yeah
that is pretty bizarre and you've got
some antlers in the back yeah yeah yeah
yeah I guess every room it's a huge
hotel 15 stories and every room is
decorated differently
and every floor of the hotel has um
has like a theme so one's like a video
arcade theme and one's a comedy theme
and one's a horror theme
that's crazy is there are there any
rooms with a limiting beliefs theme
I don't know I think with that sumo
wrestler with the bunny ears there's
nothing limiting us
uh well at least at least we can make a
podcast on the living beliefs theme yeah
let's see that great
um yeah a little while back we did we
did one on limiting beliefs and sort of
defining what are they and how is it
that they run our lives and when they're
unexplored and how how we can start to
explore them and we've gotten a lot of
questions uh and requests from from
folks wanting us to go a little bit
deeper into limiting beliefs and really
more into how to see through them and
dismantle them and
to all the all the Jiu Jitsu that we can
do to uh find deeper Freedom so yeah how
do you feel about going into that today
it's good you know I've been we've been
um creating new curriculum around
limiting beliefs so I've been thinking a
lot about it it feels really good to
talk about it awesome I think that the
thing I want to start off with is that
in the last podcast we talked about the
fact that it was like this isn't like
your beliefs don't disappear that
they're they're integrated
meaning that when you see through a
limiting belief it doesn't mean let's
say the limiting belief is
um
life is hard
and that might be like a compulsive
belief in the limit you know and
limiting and it doesn't mean that that
belief goes away it means it gets
integrated it means that
sometimes you might think life is hard
or sometimes you might have the thought
life is hard but it doesn't create
constriction in your system
and it might mean that before you
thought about it every time you had a
certain emotional experience and now
it's you don't think about it that way
or that it doesn't have the same trigger
the same hold that that the integration
is seen through the limiting belief
doesn't make it so you can't have the
belief it makes it so that the belief
integrates into a more peaceful
existence and I think that's the before
we get started I just want to
re-emphasize that yeah yeah so seeing
through isn't making it absolutely
transparent and you have you don't see
it anymore
or that you can't see it or that you are
in opposition to that belief in any way
great that's the best way to say it is
you're not in opposition to that belief
that's a great way to say it I wouldn't
say it's I would say that it does remain
transparent you'll start to see that
um the belief is is optional
yeah
but it doesn't mean that you'll never
have it yeah it's just gone yeah right
exactly right yeah transparent in the
way that you can see it see through it
yeah yeah okay well then how do we do
that how do you how do we see through
okay two-step process let's go so I
believe I believe these things I believe
these beliefs yeah just go go go go to
somebody who he'll pump you up and
convince you that might last a little
while
no um so there's two kinds I think the
the the thing that I'm seeing really
clearly now is that there's the kind of
limiting belief that gets stuck where
and that's one that you're aware of oh
I'm aware that this is a living I
believe but I I still believe it and I
can't get out of it and when I say
believe it I don't mean intellectually
believe it it means that like it's the
rest of your body believes it and maybe
even intellectually you believe it yeah
and what does that mean like for the
rest of your body to believe it
uh so everybody here and listening to
the podcast knows that um
it's better for them to be healthy
physically healthy
and so you can know that that's an
intellectual knowing but until your
whole system gets it you're not going to
take action to be healthy
so so what I mean is like the other word
that they use for this is like rock
right so meaning that it's understood
not just intellectually like you fully
get it
and so
when I say that the whole system hasn't
gotten it means that the actions
aren't aren't um coming from that
understanding they're coming from a
different understanding
got it so I'm sitting on a couch and
I've got this belief that it's better to
be healthy and I see all the ways that I
could do something to be healthier and
my body doesn't actually produce and
follow through on an Impulse to become
healthier
correct yeah instead it beats it's it's
instead of Beats you you beat yourself
up for not doing the work or whatever
that would be
or you just ignore it or you do
avoidance or whatever it is yeah got it
so how do you how do you see through
limiting beliefs yeah so the the the
first thing is that there's two kinds I
would say two ways of looking at let me
beliefs there's the ones that are
um the ones that you just haven't seen
you don't know that they're a limiting
belief and then you find out their
elodian belief and
and then there's the kinds that you know
are a limiting belief that you haven't
fully
um integrated and and therefore you're
still acting as if
is still acting by those limiting
beliefs even though you might
intellectually see through them so the
first one for instance might be
something like oh I have a boss
and you'd never think about the idea
that you have a boss being a limiting
belief but you
notice one day that you say it to
yourself and you're like oh my gosh I
have a boss and it causes constriction
which is how you know it's a limiting
belief
and then you might
really be able to see actually I don't
have a boss what I have is a client
who
um I'm a business and I have only one
client I have an undiversified Refuge
stream and so
I I don't actually have anybody who's in
control of me or is an authority over me
I just have a client
and that might create a lot of freedom
for you and and you just see it the
Epiphany happens and it's over the
limiting belief is gone as compared to
the second kind which would be something
like oh I should be healthy
and intellectually you know it's good to
be healthy but the rest of your system
hasn't gotten on board with that and so
there's no action that shows that being
healthy is an important thing to you
instead there's maybe self-abuse or
avoidance or something like that and so
those limiting beliefs are usually
something that
have two components the first component
is that there's an emotional hook that's
sticking them in place and the other one
is that there's some basic beliefs that
are in play that are holding it in place
and so how to unstick the emotional
stuff is not something we can do on this
podcast maybe on a future podcast we can
talk about it there just won't be time
but I would love to talk about
seen through limiting beliefs and how
awareness can just do that and some of
the basic limiting beliefs that
make a whole bunch of other ones stick
in place
yeah awesome so I mean let's let's start
with what makes us not see
limiting beliefs yeah
um the first one is that there's a
logical fallacy
so we just have like a an error in our
thought like we haven't we haven't
really looked at it deeply enough to see
through the belief system
the other one is just ignorance like we
don't know that there's a possibility
like maybe nobody's ever conceived of
the fact that their boss is just one
client
um and then but the the most common one
is that there's some consequences
involved where
we don't want to have to face those
consequences so we keep ourselves in the
dark around the limiting belief so
um for instance
the consequence of the boss one might be
something like oh
oh if I don't have a boss I don't
actually have a safety here
and so I don't want to look at that I
like to work under the illusion that
because I have an employer that it's
safer than being an entrepreneur and so
I'm going to
not want to see those consequences or
maybe a limiting belief is uh
something like
um I can't do it
and
but if you do do it it means that you're
going to have to or if you believe that
you can do it then it also means that
you might fail
and and you don't want to have to suffer
the consequences of feeling like a
failure so it's easier to just believe
that I can't do it and so that's the
other thing that keeps the Unseen ones
in place
and and and the kind of the quickest
hack to seeing if if you have one of
those things is you just look for a
comparable in the space
you just say
oh wait
is there entrepreneurs that feel safe
oh is there entrepreneurs that are
actually more secure financially than me
in the job oh yes there are therefore
there must be something that I'm not
seeing or
um is there
um people who can enjoy failure is there
people who failed several times and then
succeeded in I.E Abe Lincoln or Sam
Walton uh and that can allow you to see
how your your limiting belief is untrue
or can be untrue from a certain point of
view
yeah yeah so you're pointing towards
there's there's the possibility that
people can have different beliefs and it
can be easy for them to have failure or
to experience failure or to experience
whatever emotions come from the
consequences that we might be avoiding
behind our own limiting beliefs and so
how do how do we make it easier to see
them how do we make yeah so the first
thing is that it it the the belief is to
see that the belief it's not about being
true or untrue so usually that's where
somebody gets stuck
he's like is that a true belief or is
that a non-true belief and
that is just not the way to see through
limping beliefs the way to see through
limiting beliefs is just to see that
there's constriction when you have the
thought you have the thought and then
you have constriction that is a limiting
belief it's not whether the belief is
true or untrue and so an example of this
would be
um
uh let's say let's say you have
two people that you're gonna hire for a
job
and they have identical resumes they
have the same experience there's no
nothing differentiating them except for
one thing and the one thing that's
differentiating them is one of them
thinks I can do this job well and the
other one thinks I can't really do this
job well
who are you going to hire
and it doesn't matter if that idea is
right or not right true or not true
and what matters is that they have the
more useful belief system they have less
constriction in their system around
taking this job
and and that's what you're looking for
it's never about
a good or a bad idea the other the same
thing with like the the metaphor we've
been using the I have a boss metaphor
uh or belief for some people I have a
boss is not a constrictive
thought at all so it's not a limiting
belief for them they're like yeah I have
a boss it's great my boss is great I
love having a boss this is wonderful and
for some people it's like
every time they think that they have a
boss they get constricted
and so then that's something for them to
see through so it's really not about and
and in one way it's absolutely true for
both people that they have a boss and
for another way it's absolutely true
that they don't have a boss that they
have a one client and they have an
undiversified Revenue stream
and so it's never about right or wrong
it's about what's the thought that
serves you best the way we know it
serves Us best is if it's creating
constriction in our system
and so as soon as you get that it
totally helps you see through limiting
beliefs
yeah that's more it's more about the
limiting aspect of it yeah than that
there's a belief that you have and it's
true or not true it's not even that
you're trying to prove these beliefs as
false right except as an exercise to
believe them a little bit less or to see
through what you need to see through to
let go of the constriction and find
Freedom and it's about the limitation
and as the limitation lifts you can have
the belief
and other beliefs yeah so that's exactly
right the whole thing about working with
limiting beliefs the the underlying
principle is that you're constantly
creating spaciousness
and so you're taking something that
creates constriction and you are finding
spaciousness with it and one way to do
that is to see the untruth in it and one
way to do that is to
um see that it's not your thought that
it was given to you one way is to
visualize yourself
um
in a world where that isn't your thought
anymore one way is to see that there are
people who've been very successful with
a different thought around the same
subject so all of those things can
create more spaciousness in the system
and so you're not looking for your brain
to tell you oh I don't believe this
anymore you're looking for your body to
tell you oh that thought doesn't create
constriction in my system
and and I have other thoughts that I
believe that that are more useful to me
and I know that because they don't
create
constriction in my system
so so what are some of the basic beliefs
that keep these stuck ones stuck
yeah
um
there's three main categories of these
beliefs the first one is I'm bad
the second one is it's hard and the
third is
um I'll be unsafe
those are the three categories of
beliefs that and it even works with like
letting go of learning beliefs I can't
let go of limiting beliefs because I'm
bad I can't let go of living beliefs
because it's hard I can't let go of
limiting beliefs because it I won't be
safe
those are kind of the three main
categories that
that help a belief get stuck in you know
halfway understood where our mind might
get it but the body doesn't get it
what do you mean by bad and what would
make that be a stuck belief yeah bad
with me like
um you you should be ashamed you're
responsible you tried and you can't I'm
you know broken
uh I'm broken there's something
essentially wrong with me
um it's it's any way in which you tell
yourself that
something can't change because you're
flawed by Nature what would make us
think that we're bad by Nature
yeah I mean oftentimes we're told that
most of us were raised um and with shame
as a tool of control so we've been
shamed to
um you know guilted or shamed
you know you're naughty like I mean I
I've seen parents tell their kids
they're naughty
five times in an afternoon and so it's
really hard if you get told that for
your whole life to come out of it and
think oh I'm not naughty I'm good I'm
inherently good
so that's one example
um
the other thing is that
um you can you start looking for
evidence that you're bad because other
people attack you so instead of somebody
attacks you and you think to yourself oh
that's because
they're having a bad day they haven't
had enough coffee they are projecting
they're having an issue you think oh
I've done something wrong I'm bad
and so you start using that as evidence
that you're bad
anything that goes wrong oh it shows
that I'm bad
um and the other way is to look back on
actions that you've had and you think oh
if I was good I wouldn't have whatever
cheated on my husband or I wouldn't have
like eaten the food like I know like my
brain tells me I shouldn't but I'm still
doing it that's because there's
something wrong with me I'm broke and
I'm bad
um
instead of seeing it as ignorance
instead of seeing it as
not ignorance in a bad way but ignorance
like not knowing the right tools for the
job so we get told it and then we find
evidence yeah
yeah the ignorant piece is interesting
so you you might see the belief you
might know that it's a limiting belief
at the time
like yeah I know that if I work out I'll
feel healthier and I'll feel it better
and I still am not doing that right now
yeah so even proving it with present
actions that are ignorant
correct it seems like a thing yes
exactly yeah well but but what's so
what's the ignorant piece if you if you
see the belief and you don't take the
action it's like ignorance in the body
in some deeper level yeah you know like
you're not ignorant of the idea so as an
example is you're not ignorant that
being healthy is
is a good choice you're ignorant of how
to dislodge the thought that you're bad
in your head which causes you to take
actions to prove you're bad or you are
ignorant of how to motivate yourself to
be healthy or you're ignorant of the
fact that being healthy can actually be
really fun and it doesn't have to be a
chore that oppresses you
so it it doesn't mean that you're
because clearly if you fully understood
it you would do it
yeah right but in but in their mind is I
I understand it but I'm not doing it so
I'm bad instead of I don't fully
understand it how do I find out
yeah or maybe I was ignorant of the
belief underneath it so I might I might
believe that it's great to be healthy
but I might not be I might not be seeing
the belief underneath it that the belief
that I'm broken and bad you're right or
the belief that it's hard to be healthy
or the belief that
um if I get healthy I'll be unsafe like
I know a lot of overweight people
um who stay overweight because they got
molested at some point in their life and
as soon as they see through the
molestation and they realize that they
can be attractive and safe they start
losing weight so there's a ton of things
that could be in there it's and and and
but instead we say oh we know it we're
not doing it therefore we're bad
yeah okay so how how do you know that
you're not bad
so what's interesting is like if you've
been trying to do something let's let's
use like the be healthy example and
you've been thinking about being healthy
and trying to be healthy for 20 years
that shows me that you're strong
that shows me that you have persistence
that shows me that you care about
yourself
that shows me that you're not giving up
it shows me some self-awareness it shows
me an urge for
um leaving ignorance and all those
things are really good
things that you would call oh that's
that's good that's that makes that those
are the some of the components that make
of what we would call a good person
and so we're not looking at any of that
stuff and so every single place where
you think that you're bad I'm sure that
there's 20 or 30 pieces of evidence in
that same thing just like I just said
that would actually show that you're
good
the other thing is that when people
think I'm bad and I'm broken or
something and you start digging down
with them and you say okay what exactly
is it that makes you bad okay well I'm
I'm overweight okay well there's a lot
of overweight people are they all bad no
no no they're not all bad okay then what
exactly is it that makes you bad
and if you keep on doing that they can
never get to An Answer there's no answer
for that there's no Essence thing like
and you know I I haven't worked with
murderers so maybe the murderer can
actually say that but I would suspect
even a murderer would be able to see
other murders as not bad people
um I mean we've spoken with a meal as an
exact a perfect example yeah when we had
that conversation with a meal
his journey was to stop calling himself
bad stop having that judgment because it
was it was holding him in a pattern and
so he was I had to be able to see
through that belief system to actually
get the freedom and be the kind of
person that he and Society wanted him to
be it's a great example of it
and for you guys who there's a podcast
on a meal that you can go listen to It's
a just he's an amazing human if you
haven't heard it
um Emile De Weaver in our catalog yeah
um so that's another way that you can
see that it's like you're not bad and
and then the other thing is if you
really want to prove it to yourself for
the next say three months consistently
say that you're inherently good
instead of saying I'm bad or thinking to
yourself you're bad think oh I'm
inherently good and see what happens
because a lot of the times we are the
things that we tell ourselves that we
are so if you can't tell a kid he's
naughty all the time they're going to
act naughty that's how it works
if you tell yourself you're good all the
time
then there's a good chance gonna test it
don't don't take my word for it then all
of a sudden you start acting in a way
that's
good or at least seeing your actions as
good because sometimes our idea of good
is is just some more morality or
something like that that's not actually
the feeling of goodness
and so I would say test the belief see
if you're bad or if it's just that
you've been telling yourself you're bad
so long that you are acting like it so
those will be the three things that I
would suggest that people really truly
think that they're bad that they can do
it and discover otherwise and so the
next one you mentioned was that it's
people believe that it's hard what do we
mean by that that it's hard to see
through and find Freedom yeah I mean it
generally means that like there has to
be a lot of effort it's gonna it's gonna
suck they're gonna have to endure it you
know that it's like
there's gonna need to be a lot of trying
that it can't be simple or that they
can't enjoy the process
that's usually so people are like oh
changing my limiting beliefs is hard
assumes like a chore like a level of
Oppression like a
instead of oh I can like work for 10
minutes change eliminating belief and I
immediately have some Freedom which
feels better and then I can do it again
this is great
right or therapy is going to be really
hard to go to therapy or
it's gonna be really hard to start a
business and there's some people again
you can just go to the comps there are
some people who really really have
enjoyed starting their business so
there's a way to do it to enjoy it but
the idea is it's going to be hard and
then that immediately clogs the makes it
harder to see if you're limiting beliefs
yeah and then on the other side how how
hard is it actually to just continue to
oppress ourselves
yeah totally right to endure is
hard
to tell yourself you have to endure
stuff is hard yeah exactly
yeah so so why why does that persist why
does it what is the belief that
something's hard persist when in reality
it's actually harder to continue
yeah one is we don't know how to
sometimes we don't know how to do it so
we we just say it's hard because we
haven't done it before
uh there's this lattice work of ideas on
giving up limiting beliefs and if we
don't know that it seems hard rather
than oh here's the path to get there and
we can talk about lattice work a little
later if you want and then
um the other reason is because emotions
hold them in place and so since people
don't know that
they think oh letting go of a limiting
belief is hard or letting go of a
behavior is hard until they realize that
it's really about an emotion that
they're not fully feeling loving and
accepting and when they do that then the
behavior Can immediately change so
there's all sorts of reasons people
think it's hard but it's just like
drywall you know if I'm gonna put up
drywall I'm gonna think it's hard and if
someone who's done drywall you know for
the last 10 years puts up drywall they
don't think it's going to be hard
and and so as soon if I'm if I go to the
person who knows how to hang drywall and
he's like here it is it's easy do it
like this
then it's immediately going to be easier
for me so like anything a lot of the
hardness is about ignorance and we've
been trying the same thing in the same
way over and over and over again I'm
going to be healthy by losing weight I'm
going to lose weight by reducing
calories
20 years later
it's hard because it's not working
but there might be 10 other ways to lose
weight that we haven't tried yeah so the
the seeing seeing through a limiting
belief intellectually and then not
having that fully grok in our system
could continues to prove that see this
belief must be true because I keep
falling back into it just like if you're
trying to hang drywall with like a putty
like a screw that doesn't work it's just
going to keep falling like the drywall's
hard until you figure out yeah exactly
until you see what's holding the
limiting beliefs into place exactly
but it's it but it's not hard as it
turns out like
you have changed you personally
everybody has changed thousands of
limiting beliefs in their lives and
they've done it without even noticing it
our neurology is set up not to notice
all the limiting beliefs that we've seen
through because we like to think that we
have
like a coherent sense of self and that
coherent sense of self needs a set of
beliefs that you've pretty much been
believing for a long time so we don't
look back and go oh my gosh my beliefs
have completely changed
um but you're and so let me give you
some examples your belief of God between
the time you were born and now has
there's been multiple versions of God in
your mind most likely and
and they have shifted and they've become
less and less limiting your belief of
God has become less and less limiting
same with money same with
um drugs same with
um
education same with work same with
effort same with every single thing that
you can think of you thought about it
differently when you were eight
than when you were 23 then you do now
which literally means thousands your
idea of Faith your idea of love your
idea of sex your idea of all of them
have changed so thousands of your
limiting beliefs have changed without
any effort at all you don't even know
who the hell did it you didn't even
notice it was done it's super easy
and and when you fully let that in then
it then you can see that it's not that
hard well you're also implying there
that the progression of limiting
believes is that we just tend to become
more Freer from them and is to what
extent is that true to like how much can
you adopt a new limiting belief and then
become more and more stuck in it
and not not realize that we're like wow
I didn't realize over the last 10 years
my relationship with money has become
even more and more fraught and limiting
how'd that happen yeah I think it was I
think I was projecting there you're
right absolutely I've definitely seen
people particularly like
men who haven't been doing a lot of work
um when they hit their 50s they can get
become more and more constricted more
and more anger more and more you know
uh more and more limiting beliefs it can
definitely happen that way as well
um and and again they didn't try to do
it like they're just switching one
limiting belief or another without any
without any effort
so it's it's it doesn't take a lot of
effort to change your beliefs and and if
you can bring Consciousness to it it
gets even easier
and you can make sure that they're
positive yeah yeah and I guess that's
that's the kind of thing that can lead
to the difference between becoming
old and cranky and limited and living in
a very small world and then the people
who in their age age very gracefully and
are laughing and open and laughing and
still excited to learn new things
yeah yeah it's funny
um I had a
I had a uh my first therapist you know I
said she was older and her husband her
were just adorable and lovely and I
loved being around them and I asked them
like how did this happen because I was
watching my parents do something very
different
and she said you know I've looked at all
of our friends and the the people who
really
decided to to have a life of of
self-discovery all
all have become more open and more
loving than the ones who who chose not
to have all all gone the opposite
direction
that you really have to make that choice
and and I I I haven't really looked at
it like completely like I would like to
find some counter examples but I can't
think of any
counter examples of that now that I'm in
my you know 50s
I I see the same thing it's the people
who've really spent some time on it they
their world gets bigger more expansive
more free more joy more laughter and the
ones who haven't they you know who
chased after something else to make them
happy yeah it shut down on them
yeah Okay so we've we've gone through
these the underlying belief that we're
bad or that it's hard to see through
beliefs are hard to change
um and then there's the third one that
you mentioned that we will we feel like
we'll be unsafe if we stop believing
this and if you stop being limited by by
a particular belief and what do you mean
by by that
yeah so unsafe means that I'm going to
be abandoned I'm not going to be loved
something bad will happen the other foot
is going to fall
um
anything like that anything that is like
you're you're not going to be okay and
it's a more nervous system kind of way
of looking at it but yeah that's that's
a belief that'll get in the way of
people and I think even one of the
things I'll say about this is that
there's actually a marker when you start
doing some of the deeper self-discovery
work there's these moments that you have
that are like oh gosh I'm not going to
be able to relate to anybody anymore or
oh my gosh like I'm gonna lose some
friends or oh my gosh like am I going to
be able to operate in society or oh my
gosh like will I be able to keep my job
and I used to those used to scare me now
they excite me anytime I have that
thought now I'm like oh cool I'm on the
precipice of a very cool change and
um that fear is kind of like a road sign
of that
um
so it's it's it's awesome but for many
people it until it's seen through it
becomes a reason to stop looking through
the limiting beliefs yeah what's an
example of how how did that shift occur
for you moving from moving from that ah
into oh I'm on the press it looks like
my entire life is about to fall apart
right now great that clearly doesn't
mean that it's gonna be worse
objectively in the future than now
that's crazy
oh my goodness I yeah it's just it just
happened so many times there's just so
many times that that happened that and
I'm not speaking about
um like oh my gosh like my business is
about to be destroyed though now that I
think about it the the times that I have
thought that that haven't led to like
huge growth too
um but I am speaking particularly to
that belief system of
of like oh I'm not going to be able to
relate to people anymore that that
happened so many times and then at the
end of it I was so much happier and so
much more at peace that I realized that
this is a good sign to it
I can say that the times that I've been
not scared from my physical life but
scared for business or scared for
marriage
also you know um
I'm just checking to see
yeah they I can't find one at this
moment that hasn't led to some sort of
personal breakthrough or some sort of
deeper way of looking at the world
and our deeper understanding that
allowed me to live the life that I
wanted to live with more ease so yeah
even that apparently yeah yeah so what
makes us what makes us adopt these
beliefs that will that will be unsafe
yeah well I'm getting punished as a kid
being unloved or abandoned as a kid
you know you learned that if and the
other thing is there's this kind of
there's this weird like human brain
logic thing that happens which is bad
stuff occurs like pain occurs
things you know
you know
people hurt you sometimes you know bad
things happen economies collapse
things that you don't have any control
over and and and so there's these kind
of this weird learned like oh I was
happy and then this bad thing happened
so I can't be happy
because then the next puts next foot is
going to always fall I can't trust that
it'll be good because the nature of
things that are good and smooth and
peaceful is that they do not last
forever
um the only way they last forever is of
an internal mindset but the actuality of
the Earth around us is that it is in
constant flux and
in that constant flux bad things happen
what we call bad things happen and so we
learn the lesson that they're always
going to happen we never like nobody has
ever well some people have but very
rarely do you ever hear somebody go oh
things are horrible right now so
something good must happen right now
and it always happens that way like
there's always something good that
happens after the bad and but we never
think that way we because our brains are
neurology neurologically set up to look
for
cause and effect to avoid negative
effect
and so that's also part of the reason
that we
we think that we're going to be unsafe
yeah
um it's like oh it's only only uphill
from here
yeah the weird thing is I don't know
exactly right it's very rare rare for
someone to think that and what's
interesting is that neurologically
speaking
it's like and they did this study in war
that and it's a true in climate change
it's like when somebody is experienced
Devastation very close to them that
didn't affect them like a bomb going off
in the apartment next door or their City
getting
um ruined by a big flood that they are
less likely to believe it will affect
them in the future huh which is amazing
to me yeah
um because they they're like oh well I
survived it so I'll probably survive the
next one which is interesting or some
people think
um
some people think that what's happening
is like a cognitive what's the word for
a cognitive I can't remember the word
but um it basically they have to believe
it can't happen to them or they would
have to leave the situation and since
they stay they have to believe that it's
not so it could be like a self-selecting
bias
but it is a phenomenon study yeah that's
interesting I could see on one hand
there's like a confirmation bias
um and I'm speaking like Yeah from from
being a base jumper and having a lot of
people die around me there's like oh
well if I'm still alive then that must
mean I'm one of the people that does
things in a way that has me still alive
so I'm
safe right right uh and then they're
yeah another one could just be
the pain of this danger is
like increasing and I need to dissociate
from it more and more so that I can
continue to feel safe and I can imagine
both of those happening at the same time
can lead to this this phenomenon
yeah yeah
but in general what we do is we go oh
I'm not safe and then our nervous
system is on alert all the time looking
for the next thing that's going to
happen which makes
seeing their limiting beliefs very
challenging yeah yeah
okay so let's say we have everything
going on around us the universe is
stochastic and how do we prove that we
are safe what is how do you how do you
prove the other side of this belief yeah
you're You're Not Safe you're right
you're not safe this one's a tricky one
because you're you're definitely you're
gonna die
right like we're all gonna die and so
ultimately in that way there is no
safety the only safety that you can have
the only security you can have is
um
is the security of of knowing yourself
it's the only security you can have in
this life and I remember I picked up
this I was like 20 years old I was in
Santa Cruz I think I was probably like
smoking pot and hiking and playing music
or something and there's this guy
hitchhiking and
he was a short skinny man in robes and
but he wasn't he was just in robes he
wasn't a monk or anything so I picked
him up hitchhiking and I was like for
some reason I asked him what do you
think the biggest problem in America is
he goes ow everyone's insecure
everyone feels insecure I think was his
exact word and and I remember thinking
do you mean like are they like not
confident and secure
or are they insecure
like um like they don't feel safe
insecure and so I asked him he says the
same thing there's no difference between
those two in his world and so it always
like struck me that
that feeling of safety and you could see
he clearly felt very safe and very
secure it's a very internal thing so
um
so I would say
but on a practical level we feel a lot
more insecure unsafe than we actually
are so oh I'm going to start a company
that's unsafe but a ton of uh
entrepreneurs have done it successfully
and be have become far far more secure
so look wherever you think you're
insecure you can probably find somebody
or unsafe you can probably find somebody
who's done it and has been successful in
it
um as far as being abandoned everybody
can find a community you can be a
sociopathy wants to kill people and find
a community of other sociopaths who want
to kill people like in Isis
the other thing is you can look and you
can say hey I've you've thrived
like look at your life
up until now you probably for most
people listening you know have had you
know your career has gone in a not maybe
not the traditionary that you wanted but
it's gone up and to the right that you
um
that you you know have fed yourself the
whole time that you have had friends the
whole time so you've been waiting for
this impending doom that hasn't occurred
um
and so those are there's all pieces of
evidence in that and what our brain
likes to do is just like the I'm bad it
likes to look for yeah but this one
thing went wrong instead of looking at
all the things that went right
so that's another but but inherently
we're not safe
I guess like what if it seems like that
trend has been in the opposite direction
let's say for somebody who had had it
made and then the pandemic hit and then
they socially distanced for a long time
and now they're really really socially
anxious and their job fell apart because
their industry fell apart and
they're yeah you know they they don't
feel like they have a sense of community
they don't feel and they could look for
evidence to the opposite somewhere but
it feels like the trend for them has
just moved in a further from that
and how how for those people would they
looking for somebody out there who's
successful might just make them feel
more comparison more bad yeah so so what
you're describing probably is someone
who's you know depressed or suffers from
a lot of anxiety and so
is it the fact that they're not safe or
is it the fact that they think they're
not safe or are they is it the fact that
they're bad or the fact that they think
they're bad that is causing that reality
to unfold now obviously that's not true
for everybody
um
but what's the more useful thought
what's the thought that's less limiting
is it that I'm safe or is it that I am
against it's not about Truth Or Not
truth either it's about creating
spaciousness and so
is their thought I'm not safe and I'm
bad is that helping them get out of that
situation is it creating constriction in
their system is it useful or is uh seen
through that thought in whatever way
that they have to or can and there are
and so the other thing is you can move
to the comparables which is there's been
plenty of people who have been in that
situation
job hasn't gone away Community has gone
away wife kids have gone away went to
jail whatever who have created like a
meal Weaver a great life
for themselves and have contributed to
society and have love in their life
so how did that happen if they're
inherently unsafe or they're inherently
bad so there's always a way to look at
it but again it's not about that's that
is exactly where the Trap happens is
like no but it's this is a correct
thought
and
and correct doesn't matter what matters
is does it create constriction or not
constriction in your system
yeah great great call out
yeah so ultimately ultimately it's it's
seeing that we are still here despite
everything we believe about ourselves
and have believed about how we might not
make it
here we are and yes like the ultimately
the evidence of the fact that we are
presently here and thinking these
thoughts and doing this exploration and
listening to this podcast is evidence
yeah and it's just useful and it's less
constrictive
so what what else makes it that breaking
limiting belief seems to be seems to be
hard
yeah and we mentioned the lattice work
piece and I would want to go into that
for a second which is yeah so you have
one belief you can see through it but
the behavior doesn't change
but there could be like a lattice work
of belief systems that are holding that
in place that behavior in place so for
instance
let's say something happens in your life
uh that your company is going to do
cutbacks probably something a lot of
people are feeling right now
and
and then the first thought that you find
is a living believer is like what's
happening is wrong okay that's that I
feel the constriction that's the linear
belief you work on it then you might
find out like
I don't like what is hap I don't like
What's Happening Here might be another
belief that is part of the limiting
belief lattice work and then then you
might find out change is hard
oh this is going to be changing change
is hard
and then maybe change is unsafe
you might be another belief system and
then it'll be I'll be punished because
every time change happened in your house
you got hit right or your mom or dad
yelled or everybody was anxious oh my
God we're going to the airport oh every
time the airport trip everyone's
freaking the hell out or did you get the
thing where's the passport I don't
like change
right and then you so then it's like oh
it isn't safe then I'll be punished so
then you'll notice that the belief
system is when change is happening I'll
be punished and then maybe the belief is
in there that I'm bad
and so there's like there's lattice work
of beliefs that can happen and so we
work on one nothing's changed okay
instead of like actually looking at the
whole lattice work of beliefs that can
be seen through
yeah and that can sort of explain I
think some of the emotional undertone of
if you're looking at the surface level
belief of like I'm losing my job and
this is bad this is wrong yeah then the
actual emotional component of that might
be all the way down at the bottom of
that structure of I am bad yes or I'll
never be able to find another job or I
was just faking it through this one
anyway now I'm screwed right you know
right yeah yeah yeah yeah and and it
could be maybe multiple ones like the at
some point you're like it you know there
might be anger there yeah in one of the
belief systems and fear in another
belief system so yeah and that's where
the emotional components becomes a
really important thing I like to really
understand the emotions that hold these
things in place
yeah so so then what do we do when we
when we see that
so I mean the slattus work looks like
it's a fractal that can just it's a vast
fractal that can go on forever yes and
all of it might just land in the same
place of I am unlovable I'll be alone
I'm gonna die yes it could all go back
to the fact that you exist in the first
place so there's some you that needs to
be protected or
or I'm bad or I'm unsafe there are some
core ones
um but each time you feel constriction
There's an opportunity for more freedom
in a belief system and the first thing
is just trust the awareness and we'll go
into like how to unhinge the emotional
part of it
and maybe we'll have one on like ways to
flush it that's a little bit more
intricate than the last limited beliefs
episode but
um but really to trust your awareness to
just know that if you can see it clearly
you can feel it clearly you can create
the spaciousness that the rest can take
care of itself
indeed like to some degree
um putting a whole bunch of effort to
change it after you see it is telling
yourself that you don't see it
right like if I get two plus two is four
I don't tell myself I gotta remember two
plus two is four
I like I I like I I will be how do I
make sure that I know that two plus two
equals four from this point on you know
like that you don't do that because you
got it you don't need to do that so if
you are asking yourself oh what do I
have to do just you know to unstick
aluminum believe it means that you
haven't seen through it all the way
and so
trusting the awareness is an incredibly
important thing and then
um and then we'll do some tools that
really help with the emotional stuff and
then you know inquiry as we talked about
before in the last podcast is really
really good is to
anything that creates that spaciousness
inquiry is part of it but anything that
creates spaciousness from between you
and the thought
or that or spaciousness within you and
when you're thinking about beliefs in
that pattern like how do you create
spaciousness yeah yeah yeah and in that
piece of creating spaciousness while
going through this process I I can just
imagine a common sort of self-help trap
of oh like these things in my life are
happening and I don't want to be
happening I'm feeling constricted around
it and I've got to find the limiting
beliefs and I think I see them but I
don't see through them because I don't
believe it and my body's still
constricted so now I've got to dig
harder and then that becomes another
constriction how do we another limiting
belief how do we stay out of that yeah
so order of operations yeah like
everything that you just described you
your voice even constricted describing
it so those are all again limiting
beliefs and so I mean I so the the cute
answer is and I think the way I answered
this the end of the last podcast
actually was
um was you know you work on that
limiting belief the other answer I could
have is like be gentle like this is
like you do this naturally a thousand
times you've done it in your life like
be gentle within the process and allow
yourself to unfold
it it
you have to it it requires a lot of
effort not to evolve not to shift not to
um mature it requires a lot of effort to
do that so
let go the effort allow for gentleness
to do its work
yeah beautiful
clear pleasure yeah thank you Joe thanks
Brett thank you
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]
thank you